ARTICLE 3. SALE OF TAX LIENS AND NONENTERED, ESCHEATED AND WASTE AND UNAPPROPRIATED LANDS.
§11A-3-1. Declaration of legislative purpose and policy.
In view of the paramount necessity of providing regular tax income for the state, county, and municipal governments, particularly for school purposes; and in view of the further fact that delinquent land not only constitutes a public liability, but also represents a failure on the part of delinquent private owners to bear a fair share of the costs of government; and in view of the rights of owners of real property to adequate notice and an opportunity for redemption before they are divested of their interests in real property for failure to pay taxes or have their property entered on the land books; and in view of the fact that the circuit court suits heretofore provided prior to deputy commissioners’ sales are unnecessary and a burden on the judiciary of the state; and in view of the necessity to continue the mechanism for the disposition of escheated and waste and unappropriated lands; now therefore, the Legislature declares that its purposes in the enactment of this article are as follows: (1) To provide for the speedy and expeditious enforcement of the tax claims of the state and its subdivisions; (2) to provide for the transfer of delinquent and non-entered lands to those that will make beneficial use of said lands who are more responsible to, or better able to bear, the duties of citizenship than were the former owners; (3) to secure adequate notice to owners of delinquent and nonentered property of the pending issuance of a tax deed; (4) to permit deputy commissioners of delinquent and nonentered lands to sell such lands without the necessity of proceedings in the circuit courts; (5) to reduce the expense and burden on the state and its subdivisions of tax sales so that such sales may be conducted in an efficient manner while respecting the due process rights of owners of real property; and (6) to provide for the disposition of escheated and waste and unappropriated lands.
§11A-3-2. Second publication of list of delinquent real estate; notice.
(a) On or before the September 10 of each year, the sheriff shall prepare a second list of delinquent lands, which shall include all real estate in his or her county remaining delinquent as of the first day of September, together with a notice of sale, in form or effect as follows:
Notice is hereby given that the following described tracts or lots of land or undivided interests therein in the County of****\_\_**** and the tax liens that encumber the same which are delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes for the year (or years) 20**_, will be certified to the Auditor for disposition pursuant to West Virginia Code §11A-3-44 on the 31st day of October, 20_**.
Upon certification to the Auditor, tax liens on each unredeemed tract or lot, or each unredeemed part thereof or undivided interest therein, shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder in an amount which shall not be less than the taxes, interest, and charges which shall be due thereon to the date of sale, as set forth in the following table:
Name of person charged with taxes
Quantity of land
Local description
Total amount of taxes, interest and charges due to date of sale

If any of said tracts or lots remain unsold following the auction, they shall be subject to sale by the Auditor without additional advertising or public auction such terms as the Auditor deems appropriate pursuant to §11A-3-48 of this code.
Any of the aforesaid tracts or lots, or part thereof or an undivided interest therein, may be redeemed by the payment to the undersigned sheriff (or collector) before certification to the Auditor, of the total amount of taxes, interest, and charges due thereon up to the date of redemption by credit card, cashier’s check, money order, certified check or United States currency. Payment must be received in the tax office by the close of business on the last business day prior to the certification.
After certification to the Auditor, any of the aforesaid tracts or lots may be redeemed by any person entitled to pay the taxes thereon at any time prior to the sale by payment to the Auditor of the total amount of taxes, interest, and charges due thereon up to the date of redemption.
Given under my hand this****\_\_****day of
****\_\_****, 20\_\_\_.

---

Sheriff (or collector).
The sheriff shall publish the list and notice prior to the sale date fixed in the notice as a Class III-0 legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of §59-3-1 et seq. of this code, and the publication area for such publication shall be the county.
(b) In addition to such publication, no less than 30 days prior to the sale by the Auditor pursuant to § 11A-3-44 of this code, the sheriff shall send a notice of the delinquency and the date of sale by certified mail: (1) To the last known address of each person listed in the land books whose taxes are delinquent; (2) to each person having a lien on real property upon which the taxes are due as disclosed by a statement filed with the sheriff pursuant to the provisions of section three of this article; (3) to each other person with an interest in the property or with a fiduciary relationship to a person with an interest in the property who has in writing delivered to the sheriff on a form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner a request for such notice of delinquency; and (4) in the case of property which includes a mineral interest but does not include an interest in the surface other than an interest for the purpose of developing the minerals, to each person who has in writing delivered to the sheriff, on a form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, a request for such notice which identifies the person as an owner of an interest in the surface of real property that is included in the boundaries of such property: Provided, That in a case where one owner owns more than one parcel of real property upon which taxes are delinquent, the sheriff may, at his or her option, mail separate notices to the owner and each lienholder for each parcel or may prepare and mail to the owner and each lienholder a single notice which pertains to all such delinquent parcels. If the sheriff elects to mail only one notice, that notice shall set forth a legally sufficient description of all parcels of property on which taxes are delinquent. In no event shall failure to receive the mailed notice by the landowner or lienholder affect the validity of the title of the property conveyed if it is conveyed pursuant to §11A-3-27 of §11A-3-59 of this code.
(c) To cover the cost of preparing and publishing the second delinquent list, a charge of $25 shall be added to the taxes, interest, and charges already due on each item and all such charges shall be stated in the list as a part of the total amount due.
(d) To cover the cost of preparing and mailing notice to the landowner, lienholder, or any other person entitled thereto pursuant to this section, a charge of $10 per addressee shall be added to the taxes, interest, and charges already due on each item and all such charges shall be stated in the list as a part of the total amount due.
(e) Any person whose taxes were delinquent on the first day of September may have his or her name removed from the delinquent list prior to the time the same is delivered to the newspapers for publication by paying to the sheriff the full amount of taxes and costs owed by the person at the date of such redemption. In such case, the sheriff shall include but $3 of the costs provided in this section in making such redemption. Costs collected by the sheriff hereunder which are not expended for publication and mailing shall be paid into the General County Fund.
§11A-3-3. Waiver of notice by person claiming lien.
(a) Any person claiming a lien against real property shall be deemed to have waived the right to notice provided by section two of this article unless he shall have filed a statement declaring such interest with the sheriff. Such statement shall be filed upon creation of the lien and upon release of said lien and upon any change of the lienholder's postal address since the original filing of such statement.
Such statement shall be sufficient if it is filed at the time the document creating the lien is filed and when said lien is released on a form and in a manner to be prescribed from time to time by the Tax Commissioner, which form shall include the name of the person charged with taxes for the real property; the tax map and parcel number of the property; the assessor's account number of the property; a description of the interest claimed; and the address to which notice is to be sent: Provided, That it shall be sufficient for purposes of this section if the information required by this section is provided on a sales listing form prescribed in section six, article twenty-two, chapter eleven of this code and filed with the clerk of the county commission at the time of the filing of the document. The statement may be amended at any time by the person claiming the lien, upon such amended form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Tax Commissioner: Provided, however, That in counties with a population greater than two hundred thousand any person claiming liens against more than fifty parcels of real estate may file such statement electronically in a similar format as before described designed by the Tax Commissioner.
(b) At least once a year prior to July 1, the sheriff shall publish a notice that any person claiming a lien against taxable real property must file the statement required by this section or such person will be deemed to have waived any right to notice provided by the preceding section. The notice shall be published as a Class I legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of article three, chapter fifty-nine of this code, and the publication area for such publication shall be the county in which such land is located.
§11A-3-4. Redemption after second publication and before certification to the Auditor.
Any of the real estate included in the list published pursuant to the provisions of §11A-3-2 of this code may be redeemed at any time before certification to the Auditor as provided in §11A-3-8 of this code, by cashier check, money order, certified check, or United States currency.
§11A-3-8. Certification of property to the Auditor.
If any real estate included in the list published pursuant to the provisions of §11A-3-2 of this code is not redeemed in accordance with §11A-3-4 of this code by October 31 of the year the list was published, the sheriff shall certify the real estate except the sheriff shall include any subsequent taxes due at the time of the list published pursuant to §11A-3-2 of this code to the Auditor for disposition pursuant to §11A-3-44 of this code, subject, however, to the right of redemption provided by §11A-3-38 of this code. The Auditor shall prescribe the form by which the sheriff certifies the property.
§11A-3-9. Sheriff’s list of redemptions and certifications; oath.
(a) As soon as the certification provided in §11A-3-8 of this code has been completed, the sheriff shall prepare a list of all tax liens on delinquent real estate redeemed before certification or certified to the Auditor. The heading of the list shall be in form or effect as follows:
List of tax liens on real estate in the county of ****\_\_****, returned delinquent for nonpayment of taxes thereon for the year (or years) 20**\_, and redeemed before certification or certified to the Auditor.
(b) The sheriff shall, at the foot of the list, subscribe an oath, which shall be subscribed before and certified by some person duly authorized to administer oaths, in form or effect as follows:
I, **\_\_\_\_****, sheriff (or deputy sheriff or collector) of the county of ****\_\_****, do swear that the above list contains a true account of all the tax liens on real estate within my county returned delinquent for nonpayment of taxes thereon for the year (or years) 20\_\_\_, which were redeemed before certification or certified to the Auditor.
(c) Except for the heading and the oath, the Auditor shall prescribe the form of the list.
§11A-3-10. Sheriff to account for proceeds; disposition of surplus.
(a) The sheriff shall account for the proceeds of all redemptions included in such list in the same way he or she accounts for other taxes collected by him or her.
(b) All real estate included in the first delinquent list sent to the Auditor, and not accounted for in the list of redemptions and certifications, shall be deemed to have been redeemed before certification, and the taxes, interest, and charges due thereon shall be accounted for by the sheriff as if they had been received by him or her before the sale.
§11A-3-11. Return of list certifications; redemptions.
(a) Within one month after completion of the certification, the sheriff shall deliver the original list of redemptions and certifications described in §11A-3-9 of this code, with a copy thereof, to the clerk of the county commission. The clerk shall bind the original of such list in a permanent book to be kept for the purpose in his or her office. The clerk, within 10 days after delivery of the list to him or her, shall transmit the copy to the Auditor, who shall note each redemption, and certification on the record of delinquent lands kept in his or her office.
(b) Any sheriff who fails to prepare and return the list of redemptions and certifications within the time required by this section shall forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $500, for the benefit of the general school fund, to be recovered by the Auditor or by any taxpayer of the county on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the petition of any person interested, the sheriff may be compelled by mandamus to make out and return the list and the proceedings thereon shall be at his or her cost.
